If we look at our filterChain,
the last filter in the list is the FilterSecurityInterceptor.
When the request reaches this filter,
it checks if the principle is authorized to access the intended resource.
If we access our demo app for the first time,
the interceptor will detect that this resource requires
the principle to be authenticated.
Remember, however, not all resources will require authentication.
You can expose some resources, like the login page or landing pages,
to be accessed by an anonymous user.
However, in this case,
the interceptor filter will throw a 403 AuthenticationException,
as the portfolio resource requires an authenticated user.
This exception will then propagate up the filterChain and be
intercepted by the ExceptionsTranslationFilter,
which, as the name suggests, translates exceptions.
So it will catch the AuthenticationException,
which will then delegate it to the authenticationEntryPoint.
Now, as Spring Security supports many ways of authentication,
each will have its own entry point,
and generally the entry point will have its own way of
informing the user that they need to authenticate.
For formLogin, it will redirect the user to the login page,
while for basic, it will return the header informing them that basic is required.
Now if we look at our demo's entry point,
because we have formLogin, it's the LoginUrlAuthenticationEntryPoint.
This is why we are redirected to the login page.
If the user enters in their credentials and submits the
request to the AuthenticationEndPoint,
this will then be an authentication request and be
intercepted by an authentication filter.
In our case, it's the UsernamePasswordAuthenticationFilter,
which will extract the credentials and attempt authentication.
If the user, however, enters the wrong credentials,
then it's the filter and not interceptor that will throw
an authentication failure exception.
An AuthorizationException, on the other hand,
would be thrown by the interceptor filter if the user was
authenticated but no authorized to access the resource.
For example, our demo application has an admin page.
We could configure this URL to require the user to be
authenticated and have the role of admin.
Now, if we access this page as our test user,
dave, who doesn't have the admin role,
this time it will be an AuthorizationException,
401 Forbidden.
The ExceptionTranslationFilter would then redirect the
request to the accessDeniedHandler.
Now by default.
it would just render a whitelabel default error page.
If you recall, by default,
Spring Boot configured both form and basic authentication,
but also by default, the entry point was the LoginUrlAuthenticationEntryPoint.
So if an anonymous user accessed the portfolio URL,
the user was redirected to the formLogin page.
If, however, you wanted the user to be prompted with basic authentication,
then you could use the ExceptionsHandlerBuilder to use the
BasicAuthenticationEntryPoint, also a different entry point.
This would then return the BasicAuthentication header,
and the browser would prompt the user for their credentials.
Next, let's look at authentication exceptions due to invalid authentication attempts.